---
layout: post
title: Uncovering "Jury Tariffs" in the US Justice System
jsarr:
- tableau/post_dashboard_2.js
categories: Javascript
---

My most recent data science project entailed using court sentencing data to predict whether a defendant plead guilty, or was found guilty by a jury at trial. By total coincidence, the dataset I used on guilty sentences from the county in which I live, Cook County, IL. While I thought predicting the conviction type of a particular case would provide insight into the power of plea bargaining, I had no idea that it was also closely tied to a long-standing controversy within the US justice system.

Upon speaking with a close friend about my project, I was pointed in the direction toward [a Chicago Tribune article](https://www.chicagotribune.com/news/ct-xpm-1985-10-13-8503090729-story.html) on "jury tariffs," a concept which refers to the defendants receiving an increase in sentencing time when they take their case to trial instead of pleading guilty. We expect the same penalty for the same crimes, but jury tariffs suggests that this is often not the case. According to one anonymous Cook County Judge quoted in the Chicago Tribune article, "Not having a jury trial can save a lot of time and effort. Pragmatically speaking, it’s necessary and it’s justified to give a guy a tougher sentence if he takes more time and burdens the system." (Tybor, Joseph R. & Eissman, Mark. "JUDGES PENALIZE THE GUILTY FOR EXERCISING RIGHT TO JURY TRIAL." *Chicago Tribune,* 13 October 1985') While some may see logic in this judge's efforts to keep the justice system from becoming backlogged with too many cases, the reality (*as stated in the Chicago Tribune article*) is that "The Illinois Supreme Court has ruled on several occasions that the accused cannot be punished for electing to have his case decided by a jury." (Tybor & Eissman)

I soon realized that by predicting conviction type using only features that would be known at the start of a new case, I could investigate the prevalence of jury tariffing in Cook County. The rationale around this approach was that my model should not be good at all. Using only start of case features like the defendants demographics, age, the crime they were charged with, and their sentence length (*I included sentence length because a defendant would likely know their potential sentence at the start of a trial,*) one should not be able to accurately predict whether a defendant plead guilty or was found guilty by a jury at trial. Since jury tariffs have been ruled unconstitutional by the Illinois Supreme Court, sentencing time cannot effected by a defendants decision to go to trial.
